CloudWatch has many components.
Alerting is one of them,
although CloudWatch itself does not actually try to get in touch with you.
CloudWatch integrates with other AWS services,
and from those services you can take actions to get people out of bed to resolve issues.
CloudWatch alarms is where you describe the conditions that you want to alert on.
You can say, if the database CPU utilization goes over 85 percent,
I want to do something.
CloudWatch alarms is flexible to your needs.
It lets you determine not just what level to alert at,
but also how to interpret a given metric.
You can describe your alerts in greater detail.
For example, if the database CPU utilization,
one minute average is over 85 percent for three out of five minutes,
I want to do something.
As you build your systems,
you will need to consider things like momentary spikes of utilization
and decide if they are impactful or not impactful to your business.
You may be wondering what does do something mean. Good question.
You've reached the, it's time to do
something point on metric within your system. Now what?
CloudWatch alarms allows you to trigger an action based on an alert condition.
These actions are all centered around sending events to SNS topics.
Anything you can do with SNS,
you can do with an alert.
SNS allows you to directly send emails or text messages.
It also allows you to trigger Lambda functions and send HTTP requests.
These last two are key integration points with outside systems.
When something is critical enough that it should wake people up,
you can use third parties who specialize in doing just that.
Products like PagerDuty or VictorOps can receive events from SNS.
You can set up support rotations and multiple levels of alerting, mobile app messaging,
texts, phone calls, etc,
so that the alarm keeps escalating until someone deals with it.